@node Portable File Format
@appendix Portable File Format

These days, most computers use the same internal data formats for
integer and floating-point data, if one ignores little differences like
big- versus little-endian byte ordering.  However, occasionally it is
necessary to exchange data between systems with incompatible data
formats.  This is what portable files are designed to do.

@strong{Please note:} This information is gleaned from examination of
ASCII-formatted portable files only, so some of it may be incorrect
for portable files formatted in EBCDIC or other character sets.

@menu
* Portable File Characters::
* Portable File Structure::
* Portable File Header::
* Version and Date Info Record::
* Identification Records::
* Variable Count Record::
* Precision Record::
* Case Weight Variable Record::
* Variable Records::
* Value Label Records::
* Portable File Document Record::
* Portable File Data::
@end menu

@node Portable File Characters
@section Portable File Characters

Portable files are arranged as a series of lines of 80
characters each.  Each line is terminated by a carriage-return,
line-feed sequence (``new-lines'').  New-lines are only used to avoid
line length limits imposed by some OSes; they are not meaningful.

Most lines in portable files are exactly 80 characters long.  The only
exception is a line that ends in one or more spaces, in which the
spaces may optionally be omitted.  Thus, a portable file reader must
act as though a line shorter than 80 characters is padded to that
length with spaces.

The file must be terminated with a @samp{Z} character.  In addition, if
the final line in the file does not have exactly 80 characters, then it
is padded on the right with @samp{Z} characters.  (The file contents may
be in any character set; the file contains a description of its own
character set, as explained in the next section.  Therefore, the
@samp{Z} character is not necessarily an ASCII @samp{Z}.)

For the rest of the description of the portable file format, new-lines
and the trailing @samp{Z}s will be ignored, as if they did not exist,
because they are not an important part of understanding the file
contents.

@node Portable File Structure
@section Portable File Structure

Every portable file consists of the following records, in sequence:

@itemize @bullet

@item
File header.

@item
Version and date info.

@item
Product identification.

@item
Author identification (optional).

@item
Subproduct identification (optional).

@item
Variable count.

@item
Case weight variable (optional).

@item
Variables.  Each variable record may optionally be followed by a
missing value record and a variable label record.

@item
Value labels (optional).

@item
Documents (optional).

@item
Data.
@end itemize

Most records are identified by a single-character tag code.  The file
header and version info record do not have a tag.

Other than these single-character codes, there are three types of fields
in a portable file: floating-point, integer, and string.  Floating-point
fields have the following format:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Zero or more leading spaces.

@item
Optional asterisk (@samp{*}), which indicates a missing value.  The
asterisk must be followed by a single character, generally a period
(@samp{.}), but it appears that other characters may also be possible.
This completes the specification of a missing value.

@item
Optional minus sign (@samp{-}) to indicate a negative number.

@item
A whole number, consisting of one or more base-30 digits: @samp{0}
through @samp{9} plus capital letters @samp{A} through @samp{T}.

@item
Optional fraction, consisting of a radix point (@samp{.}) followed by
one or more base-30 digits.

@item
Optional exponent, consisting of a plus or minus sign (@samp{+} or
@samp{-}) followed by one or more base-30 digits.

@item
A forward slash (@samp{/}).
@end itemize

Integer fields take a form identical to floating-point fields, but they
may not contain a fraction.

String fields take the form of a integer field having value @var{n},
followed by exactly @var{n} characters, which are the string content.

@node Portable File Header
@section Portable File Header

Every portable file begins with a 464-byte header, consisting of a
200-byte collection of vanity splash strings, followed by a 256-byte
character set translation table, followed by an 8-byte tag string.

The 200-byte segment is divided into five 40-byte sections, each of
which represents the string @code{@var{charset} SPSS PORT FILE} in a
different character set encoding, where @var{charset} is the name of
the character set used in the file, e.g.@: @code{ASCII} or
@code{EBCDIC}.  Each string is padded on the right with spaces in its
respective character set.

It appears that these strings exist only to inform those who might view
the file on a screen, and that they are not parsed by SPSS products.
Thus, they can be safely ignored.  For those interested, the strings are
supposed to be in the following character sets, in the specified order:
EBCDIC, 7-bit ASCII, CDC 6-bit ASCII, 6-bit ASCII, Honeywell 6-bit
ASCII.

The 256-byte segment describes a mapping from the character set used in
the portable file to an arbitrary character set having characters at the
following positions:

@table @asis
@item 0--60

Control characters.  Not important enough to describe in full here.

@item 61--63

Reserved.

@item 64--73

Digits @samp{0} through @samp{9}.

@item 74--99

Capital letters @samp{A} through @samp{Z}.

@item 100--125

Lowercase letters @samp{a} through @samp{z}.

@item 126

Space.

@item 127--130

Symbols @code{.<(+}

@item 131

Solid vertical pipe.

@item 132--142

Symbols @code{&[]!$*);^-/}

@item 143

Broken vertical pipe.

@item 144--150

Symbols @code{,%_>}?@code{`:}   @c @code{?} is an inverted question mark

@item 151

British pound symbol.

@item 152--155

Symbols @code{@@'="}.

@item 156

Less than or equal symbol.

@item 157

Empty box.

@item 158

Plus or minus.

@item 159

Filled box.

@item 160

Degree symbol.

@item 161

Dagger.

@item 162

Symbol @samp{~}.

@item 163

En dash.

@item 164

Lower left corner box draw.

@item 165

Upper left corner box draw.

@item 166

Greater than or equal symbol.

@item 167--176

Superscript @samp{0} through @samp{9}.

@item 177

Lower right corner box draw.

@item 178

Upper right corner box draw.

@item 179

Not equal symbol.

@item 180

Em dash.

@item 181

Superscript @samp{(}.

@item 182

Superscript @samp{)}.

@item 183

Horizontal dagger (?).

@item 184--186

Symbols @samp{@{@}\}.
@item 187

Cents symbol.

@item 188

Centered dot, or bullet.

@item 189--255

Reserved.
@end table

Symbols that are not defined in a particular character set are set to
the same value as symbol 64; i.e., to @samp{0}.

The 8-byte tag string consists of the exact characters @code{SPSSPORT}
in the portable file's character set, which can be used to verify that
the file is indeed a portable file.

@node Version and Date Info Record
@section Version and Date Info Record

This record does not have a tag code.  It has the following structure:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A single character identifying the file format version.  The letter A
represents version 0, and so on.

@item
An 8-character string field giving the file creation date in the format
YYYYMMDD.

@item
A 6-character string field giving the file creation time in the format
HHMMSS.
@end itemize

@node Identification Records
@section Identification Records

The product identification record has tag code @samp{1}.  It consists of
a single string field giving the name of the product that wrote the
portable file.

The author identification record has tag code @samp{2}.  It is
optional.  If present, it consists of a single string field giving the
name of the person who caused the portable file to be written.

The subproduct identification record has tag code @samp{3}.  It is
optional.  If present, it consists of a single string field giving
additional information on the product that wrote the portable file.

@node Variable Count Record
@section Variable Count Record

The variable count record has tag code @samp{4}.  It consists of a
single integer field giving the number of variables in the file
dictionary.

@node Precision Record
@section Precision Record

The precision record has tag code @samp{5}.  It consists of a single
integer field specifying the maximum number of base-30 digits used in
data in the file.

@node Case Weight Variable Record
@section Case Weight Variable Record

The case weight variable record is optional.  If it is present, it
indicates the variable used for weighting cases; if it is absent,
cases are unweighted.  It has tag code @samp{6}.  It consists of a
single string field that names the weighting variable.

@node Variable Records
@section Variable Records

Each variable record represents a single variable.  Variable records
have tag code @samp{7}.  They have the following structure:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Width (integer).  This is 0 for a numeric variable, and a number between 1
and 255 for a string variable.

@item
Name (string).  1--8 characters long.  Must be in all capitals.

A few portable files that contain duplicate variable names have been
spotted in the wild.  PSPP handles these by renaming the duplicates
with numeric extensions: @code{@var{var}_1}, @code{@var{var}_2}, and
so on.

@item
Print format.  This is a set of three integer fields:

@itemize @minus

@item
Format type (@pxref{Variable Record}).

@item
Format width.  1--40.

@item
Number of decimal places.  1--40.
@end itemize

A few portable files with invalid format types or formats that are not
of the appropriate width for their variables have been spotted in the
wild.  PSPP assigns a default F or A format to a variable with an
invalid format.

@item
Write format.  Same structure as the print format described above.
@end itemize

Each variable record can optionally be followed by a missing value
record, which has tag code @samp{8}.  A missing value record has one
field, the missing value itself (a floating-point or string, as
appropriate).  Up to three of these missing value records can be used.

There is also a record for missing value ranges, which has tag code
@samp{B}.  It is followed by two fields representing the range, which
are floating-point or string as appropriate.  If a missing value range
is present, it may be followed by a single missing value record.

Tag codes @samp{9} and @samp{A} represent @code{LO THRU @var{x}} and
@code{@var{x} THRU HI} ranges, respectively.  Each is followed by a
single field representing @var{x}.  If one of the ranges is present, it
may be followed by a single missing value record.

In addition, each variable record can optionally be followed by a
variable label record, which has tag code @samp{C}.  A variable label
record has one field, the variable label itself (string).

@node Value Label Records
@section Value Label Records

Value label records have tag code @samp{D}.  They have the following
format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Variable count (integer).

@item
List of variables (strings).  The variable count specifies the number in
the list.  Variables are specified by their names.  All variables must
be of the same type (numeric or string), but string variables do not
necessarily have the same width.

@item
Label count (integer).

@item
List of (value, label) tuples.  The label count specifies the number of
tuples.  Each tuple consists of a value, which is numeric or string as
appropriate to the variables, followed by a label (string).
@end itemize

A few portable files that specify duplicate value labels, that is, two
different labels for a single value of a single variable, have been
spotted in the wild.  PSPP uses the last value label specified in
these cases.

@node Portable File Document Record
@section Document Record

One document record may optionally follow the value label record.  The
document record consists of tag code @samp{E}, following by the number
of document lines as an integer, followed by that number of strings,
each of which represents one document line.  Document lines must be 80
bytes long or shorter.

@node Portable File Data
@section Portable File Data

The data record has tag code @samp{F}.  There is only one tag for all
the data; thus, all the data must follow the dictionary.  The data is
terminated by the end-of-file marker @samp{Z}, which is not valid as the
beginning of a data element.

Data elements are output in the same order as the variable records
describing them.  String variables are output as string fields, and
numeric variables are output as floating-point fields.
@setfilename ignored
