\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename pspp.info
@settitle PSPP
@set TIMESTAMP Time-stamp:  Sat Oct 30 17:30:39 WST 2004
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header


@macro cmd{CMDNAME}
\CMDNAME\
@end macro

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@dircategory Math
@direntry
* PSPP: (pspp).             Statistical analysis package.
@end direntry

@ifinfo
PSPP, for statistical analysis of sampled data, by Ben Pfaff.

This file documents PSPP, a statistical package for analysis of
sampled data that uses a command language compatible with SPSS.

Copyright (C) 1996-9, 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

This version of the PSPP documentation is consistent with version 2 of
``texinfo.tex''.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above condition for modified 
versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a 
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@include version.texi

@titlepage
@title PSPP
@subtitle A System for Statistical Analysis
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for PSPP version @value{VERSION}
@author by Ben Pfaff

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

PSPP Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@contents


@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@ifinfo
@top PSPP

This file documents the PSPP package for statistical analysis of sampled
data.  This is edition @value{EDITION}, for PSPP version
@value{VERSION}, last modified at @value{TIMESTAMP}.

@end ifinfo

@menu
* Introduction::                Description of the package.
* License::                     Your rights and obligations.

* Invocation::                  Starting and running PSPP.
* Language::                    Basics of the PSPP command language.
* Expressions::                 Numeric and string expression syntax.

* Data Input and Output::       Reading data from user files.
* System and Portable Files::   Dealing with system & portable files.
* Variable Attributes::         Adjusting and examining variables.
* Data Manipulation::           Simple operations on data.
* Data Selection::              Select certain cases for analysis.
* Conditionals and Looping::    Doing things many times or not at all.
* Statistics::                  Basic statistical procedures.
* Utilities::                   Other commands.

* Not Implemented::             What's not here yet
* Bugs::                        Known problems; submitting bug reports.

* Function Index::              Index of PSPP functions for expressions.
* Command Index::               Index of PSPP procedures.
* Concept Index::               Index of concepts.

* Installation::                How to compile and install PSPP.
* Configuration::               Configuring PSPP.

* Portable File Format::        Format of PSPP portable files.
* Data File Format::            Format of PSPP system files.
* q2c Input Format::            Format of syntax accepted by q2c.
@end menu

@include introduction.texi
@include license.texi

@include invoking.texi
@include language.texi
@include expressions.texi
@include data-io.texi
@include files.texi
@include variables.texi
@include transformation.texi
@include data-selection.texi
@include flow-control.texi
@include statistics.texi
@include utilities.texi
@include not-implemented.texi
@include bugs.texi

@include function-index.texi
@include command-index.texi
@include concept-index.texi

@include installing.texi
@include configuring.texi

@include portable-file-format.texi
@include data-file-format.texi
@include q2c.texi

@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c use (texinfo-multiple-files-update "pspp.texinfo")  in emacs to keep these files consistent
@c compile-command: "makeinfo pspp.texi"
@c End:
