\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename pspp-dev.info
@settitle PSPP
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@include version-dev.texi

@macro cmd{CMDNAME}
\CMDNAME\
@end macro
@macro struct{TAG}
@code{struct \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro union{TAG}
@code{union \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro enum{TAG}
@code{enum \TAG\}
@end macro
@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@dircategory Math
@direntry
* PSPP Developers Guide: (pspp-dev). Tutorial and reference for PSPP developers.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual is for GNU PSPP version @value{VERSION},
software for statistical analysis.

Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1998, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2010, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title PSPP Developers Guide
@subtitle GNU PSPP Statistical Analysis Software
@subtitle Release @value{VERSION}
@author Ben Pfaff
@author John Darrington
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU PSPP Developers Guide

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                Introduction to PSPP development.
* Basic Concepts::              Data structures and concepts.
* Parsing Command Syntax::      How to parse command syntax.
* Processing Data::             Data input, output, and processing.
* Presenting Output::           Producing machine- and human-readable output.
* Internationalisation::        Dealing with locale issues.

* Function Index::              Index of PSPP functions.
* Concept Index::               Index of concepts.

* Portable File Format::        Format of PSPP portable files.
* System File Format::          Format of PSPP system files.
* SPSS/PC+ System File Format:: Format of SPSS/PC+ system files.
* q2c Input Format::            Format of syntax accepted by q2c.

* GNU Free Documentation License:: License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include dev/intro.texi
@include dev/concepts.texi
@include dev/syntax.texi
@include dev/data.texi
@include dev/output.texi
@include dev/i18n.texi

@include function-index.texi
@include concept-index.texi

@include dev/portable-file-format.texi
@include dev/system-file-format.texi
@include dev/pc+-file-format.texi
@include dev/q2c.texi

@include fdl.texi

@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c compile-command: "makeinfo pspp-dev.texi"
@c End:
