.\" PSPP - computes sample statistics.
.\" Copyright (C) 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH PSPPIRE 1 "August 30, 2014" "GNU" "PSPP manual"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
psppire \- graphical interface to pspp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B psppire
.RI [ options ] " files" ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBpsppire\fP is a graphical interface to \fBpspp\fP. This
interface allows you to enter data and variable definitions
interactively.  Commands may be executed in syntax form, or by
using the interactive dialog boxes available from the dropdown
menus. Up to date documentation is available via  
.IP
.B info pspp
.PP
Documentation is also available as pdf or html. On GNU/Linux based
systems you find this documentation in \fB/usr/share/doc/pspp\fP.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version of program.
.SH EXAMPLE
Create a file \fBexample.sps\fP with the following content:
.PP
.nf
.RS
* Example sps file 
data list 
  / v0 to v2 1-9.
begin data.
 12 12 89
 56 12 77
 78 12 73
 90 91
 37 97 85
 52    82
 12    79
 26 78 76
 29 13 71
end data.

examine v0
  /plot=all.
.RE
.fi
.PP
and run psppire with
.IP
.B psppire example.sps
.PP
More examples files are in \fB/usr/share/pspp/examples\fP
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pspp (1), pspp\-dump\-sav (1), pspp\-convert (1).
.SH AUTHOR
psppire was written by John Darrington.
