@node Invoking pspp-convert
@chapter Invoking @command{pspp-convert}
@cindex Invocation
@cindex @command{pspp-convert}

@command{pspp-convert} is a command-line utility accompanying
@pspp{}. It reads an SPSS system or portable file @var{input} and
writes a copy of it to another @var{output} in a different format.
Synopsis:

@display
@t{pspp-convert} [@var{options}] @var{input} @var{output}

@t{pspp-convert -@w{-}help}

@t{pspp-convert -@w{-}version}
@end display

The format of @var{input} is automatically detected, when possible.
The character encoding of old SPSS system files cannot always be
guessed correctly, and SPSS/PC+ system files do not include any
indication of their encoding.  Use @code{-e @var{encoding}} to specify
the encoding in this case.

By default, the intended format for @var{output} is inferred based on its
extension:

@table @code
@item csv
@itemx txt
Comma-separated value.  Each value is formatted according to its
variable's print format.  The first line in the file contains variable
names.

@item sav
@item sys
SPSS system file.

@item por
SPSS portable file.
@end table

Use @code{-O @var{extension}} to override the inferred format or to
specify the format for unrecognized extensions.

The following options are accepted:

@table @code
@item -O @var{format}
@itemx --output-format=@var{format}
Specifies the desired output format.  @var{format} must be one of the
extensions listed above, e.g. @code{-O csv} requests comma-separated
value output.

@item -c @var{maxcases}
@itemx --cases=@var{maxcases}
By default, all cases are copied from @var{input} to @var{output}.
Specifying this option to limit the number of cases written to
@var{output} to @var{maxcases}.

@item -e @var{charset}
@itemx --encoding=@var{charset}
Overrides the encoding in which character strings in @var{input} are
interpreted.  This option is necessary because old SPSS system files,
and SPSS/PC+ system files, do not self-identify their encoding.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Prints a usage message on stdout and exits.

@item -v
@itemx --version
Prints version information on stdout and exits.
@end table
