.\" PSPP - computes sample statistics.
.\" Copyright (C) 1997, 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH pspp 1 "4 Jul 1997" "manpage v1.0" "PSPP manual"
.SH NAME
pspp \- a system for statistical analysis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pspp
\&.\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pspp
starts up the PSPP program.  PSPP performs statistical analysis on
sampled data.  Please see Info document `pspp' for more details on
using PSPP.  For other miscellaneous information about PSPP, see
the PSPP FAQ, which should be installed in /usr/doc/pspp.

These documents and others are available in various formats.  On
Debian GNU/Linux systems, full documentation is available in directory
`/usr/doc/pspp', in HTML and ASCII formats, and in `/usr/info', in
Info format.  TeX can be used to convert the Texinfo documentation in
the source distribution to nice-looking output for printing.

Documentation is also at http://www.gnu.org/software/pspp.

.SH BUGS

Probably a lot.  Known bugs are listed in the documentation files
BUGS, LANGUAGE, and TODO, depending on type.  Please see those files
for more details.
